{{Userspace draft|article=Zeta (programming language)}}
{{Infobox programming language
| name = Zeta
| logo = 
| paradigm = Multi-paradigm: [[Generic programming|Generic]], [[Systems programming|systems]], [[Functional programming|functional]], [[Concurrent computing|concurrent]], [[Imperative programming|imperative]], [[Structured programming|structured]]
| released = {{Start date and age|2025|11|27}}
| designer = Dr. Roy Murphy
| developer = [https://z-lang.org/get-involved.html Zeta Foundation]
| latest_release_version = v0.3.19 (Rust implementation)
| latest_preview_version = v0.4.1 (Pure Zeta self-hosting)
| latest_release_date = {{Start date|2026|3|29}}
| typing = [[Affine type system|Affine]], [[Static typing|static]], [[Strong and weak typing|strong]], [[Type inference|inferred]], [[Nominal type system|nominal]]
| scope = [[Lexical scoping|Lexical]]
| operating system = [[Cross-platform software|Cross-platform]]
| license = [[MIT License|MIT]]
| website = {{URL|https://z-lang.org}}
| influenced_by = [[Rust (programming language)|Rust]], [[Haskell]], [[Erlang (programming language)|Erlang]], [[Zig (programming language)|Zig]], [[OCaml]], [[Julia (programming language)|Julia]], [[Lisp (programming language)|Lisp]], [[COBOL]], [[Forth (programming language)|Forth]], [[MATLAB]], [[JavaScript]], [[TypeScript]], [[Python (programming language)|Python]]
| file_ext = .z
}}

'''Zeta''' is a [[systems programming language]] designed for high-performance, safe, and concurrent software development. It emphasizes algebraic data types, affine ownership models, and actor-based concurrency, drawing inspiration from languages such as [[Rust (programming language)|Rust]], [[Haskell]], [[Erlang (programming language)|Erlang]], [[Zig (programming language)|Zig]], [[OCaml]], [[Julia (programming language)|Julia]], [[Lisp (programming language)|Lisp]], [[COBOL]], [[Forth (programming language)|Forth]], [[MATLAB]], [[JavaScript]], [[TypeScript]], and [[Python (programming language)|Python]]. Zeta's type system integrates concepts from [[semiring]] theory to enable optimized algebraic operations, while its borrow checker enforces memory safety without a garbage collector. The language targets LLVM for code generation, supporting just-in-time (JIT) and ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation.

First released on November 27, 2025, Zeta achieved true self-hosting in January 2026. The latest release, v0.3.19 "The Integration Release" (March 29, 2026), adds comprehensive async/await support, algebraic data types, macro system enhancements, and standard library integration. Development continues with two parallel version series: the v0.3.x Rust-based compiler implementation and the v0.4.x pure Zeta self-hosted implementation.

== History ==
Zeta was created by Dr. Roy Murphy, a mathematician, cryptographer, computer scientist, and programmer,<ref>{{cite web|url=https://x.com/murphsicles|title=Roy Murphy (@murphsicles) / X|website=x.com|access-date=January 24, 2026}}</ref> who sought to create a language implementing the foundational abstractions in [[Alexander Stepanov]]'s ''[[Elements of Programming]]'' in practical form.<ref>{{cite book |last=Stepanov |first=Alexander A. |author2=Paul McJones |title=Elements of Programming |url=https://www.elementsofprogramming.com/eop.pdf |year=2009 |publisher=Addison-Wesley |isbn=978-0321635372}}</ref> 

The initial prototype was released on November 27, 2025, with rapid iteration leading to self-hosting by January 2026. Development milestones are tracked in the project's development plan on [[GitHub]].<ref>[https://github.com/murphsicles/zeta/blob/main/src/plan.rs Zeta Development Plan]</ref>

=== Release History ===
<div class="mw-collapsible mw-collapsed">
<span class="mw-collapsible-toggle">▼ v0.0.x series (Initial releases)</span>
<div class="mw-collapsible-content">
{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Version
! Date
! Notes
|-
| v0.0.0
| November 27, 2025
| Initial prototype release
|-
| v0.0.1 – v0.0.9
| December 4–19, 2025
| Pre-release iterations with core features
|}
</div>
</div>

<div class="mw-collapsible mw-collapsed">
<span class="mw-collapsible-toggle">▼ v0.1.x series (Core features)</span>
<div class="mw-collapsible-content">
{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Version
! Date
! Notes
|-
| v0.1.0 – v0.1.7
| December 25, 2025 – January 4, 2026
| Major refactor, ergonomics, concurrency features
|}
</div>
</div>

<div class="mw-collapsible mw-collapsed">
<span class="mw-collapsible-toggle">▼ v0.2.x series (Self-hosting foundation)</span>
<div class="mw-collapsible-content">
{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Version
! Date
! Notes
|-
| v0.2.0 – v0.2.3
| January 5–20, 2026
| Self-hosting dawn, execution breakthrough, bootstrap
|}
</div>
</div>

<div class="mw-collapsible mw-collapsed">
<span class="mw-collapsible-toggle">▼ v0.3.x series (Rust implementation maturity)</span>
<div class="mw-collapsible-content">
{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Version
! Date
! Notes
|-
| v0.3.0
| January 20, 2026
| "The Dawn of True Self-Hosting"
|-
| v0.3.1 – v0.3.18
| January–March 2026
| Incremental improvements and feature enhancements
|-
| '''v0.3.19'''
| March 29, 2026
| "The Integration Release" - Latest Rust implementation
|}
</div>
</div>

<div class="mw-collapsible mw-collapsed">
<span class="mw-collapsible-toggle">▼ v0.4.x series (Pure Zeta self-hosting)</span>
<div class="mw-collapsible-content">
{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Version
! Date
! Notes
|-
| v0.4.0
| January 29, 2026
| Pure Zeta source delivered
|-
| '''v0.4.1'''
| February 18, 2026
| "Pure Zeta Self-Host from Latest Binaries" - Latest pure Zeta
|}
</div>
</div>

== Features ==
Zeta combines several innovative features:

=== Generic Type System ===
* Type inference with constraint solving ([[Hindley–Milner type system|Hindley-Milner]] based)
* [[Monomorphization]] for zero-cost abstractions
* Full compatibility with Zeta v0.5.0 generic syntax

=== Concurrency Model ===
* [[Async/await]] with thread-safe executor
* [[Green threads|M:N green-thread actors]] (runtime < 200 LOC)
* [[Channel (programming)|MPSC channels]] for message passing

=== Performance Characteristics ===
According to project benchmarks:<ref>{{cite web|url=https://github.com/murphsicles/zeta#benchmarks|title=Zeta Benchmarks|website=GitHub|access-date=2026-03-30}}</ref>
* Compile time: 14ms for self-compilation
* Runtime: 1.12ns for fib(40)
* 100k actors ping-pong: 0.94ms

== Development ==
Zeta is developed using an innovative multi-agent system called the "Dark Factory" which enables 24/7 autonomous progress with full public accountability through [[Continuous integration|continuous integration]] on GitHub.

== See also ==
* [[Rust (programming language)|Rust]]
* [[Haskell]]
* [[Erlang (programming language)|Erlang]]
* [[Elements of Programming]]

== References ==
{{Reflist}}

== External links ==
* {{Official website|https://z-lang.org}}
* [https://github.com/murphsicles/zeta Zeta on GitHub]
* [https://crates.io/crates/zetac Zeta on crates.io]

[[Category:Programming languages]]
[[Category:Systems programming languages]]
[[Category:Programming languages created in 2025]]
[[Category:MIT-licensed software]]